README.md, before:

# The OTC Project

![OTC_LOGO](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JuraszekL/OTC_Project/master/Resources/OTC_Logo.png)

OTC or just Online Table Clock is, as it says, my concept of table clock that is able to get time/weather related data from the internet.

# Table of content
1. [**In nutshell**](#in-nutshell)
2. [**Motivation**](#motivation)
3. [**Functionality**](#functionality)
4. [**Milestones**](#milestones)
5. [**Detailed description**](#detailed-description)
   * [**Hardware**](#hardware)
   * [**Configuration**](#configuration)
   * [**Tasks**](#tasks)
   * [**Most important functions**](#most-important-functions)

6.[**List of external tools/resources**](#List-of-external-tools/resources) 

# In nutshell

OTC project is based on	[ESP32 Terminal](https://www.elecrow.com/esp-terminal-with-esp32-3-5-inch-parallel-480x320-tft-capacitive-touch-display-rgb-by-chip-ili9488.html) module. The module is equipped with ESP32S3 MCU with 16MB Flash and 8MB RAM memory, 480x320 LCD screen with capacitive touch and USB-C port for serial programming. The firmware has been written in pure C, and is based on [FreeRTOS](https://www.freertos.org/) port for Espressif microcontrolers. The main tools used for this project are:
- [ESP-IDF v5.0.3](https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/tree/release/v5.0)
- [Eclipse IDE, Version: 2022-09](https://www.eclipse.org/downloads/packages/release/2022-09/r) 
- [LVGL v8.3.7](https://github.com/lvgl/lvgl/tree/release/v8.3)
- [SquareLine Studio 1.3.1](https://squareline.io/downloads)

To obtain weather and location data, is uses free [Weather API](https://www.weatherapi.com/), and [cJSON](https://github.com/DaveGamble/cJSON) library to parse the data. Encryption and decryption of stored wifi passwords are done with Espressif's port of [Mbed-TLS](https://github.com/Mbed-TLS/mbedtls) library. 

![OTC Main Screen](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JuraszekL/OTC_Project/master/Resources/OTC_MainScreen.png)

# Motivation

This project is for learning purposes only. Feel free to use it.

# Functionality

Current version - v1.0.0

In this version OTC is able to:
- search for available wifi access points and represent the results on the screen. Each one AP within the list shows SSID name, signal strength and informs that AP is protected or not.
- connect with chosen AP, show details about connected AP
- ask user to enter AP password, save encrypted password, search and decrypt saved password if exists
- delete saved password for chosen AP
- get current time, timezone and basic weather data for current location
- get detailed weather data for current location
- change color theme without reseting the device
- store theme settings in Non-Volatile Storage memory and load it during startup

# Milestones

The project is still under development. Next milestones are:
- add backlight and buzzer management
- add alarm function
- add RTC and low-power support
- add Li-Ion battery management
- add OTA firmware update
- add statistics screen
- add logfile

# Detailed description

## Hardware

Although The ESP32 Terminal module is ready to use dev board, one modification has to be done. Pin 4 of touch controller (PENI) generates an interrupt when touch is pressed; because of insufficient number of pins, that pin is disconnected with R35 jumper from GPIO0, so GPIO0 is used only to enter BOOT mode with "BOOT" switch. Observations showed that both functions (entering boot mode and recieveing touch interrupts) can be covered by GPIO0 without any unexpected behavior, so R35 has been jointed.

## Configuration

Internal flash memory is configured as Quad-SPI, and works with 80MHz. Internal RAM memory is configured as Octal-SPI and works with 80MHz as well. The .bss and Wifi/LwIP resources can be placed into external RAM. Instruction cache is set to 32kB, data cache to 64kB.
Internal Wifi task is pinned to core 1. The Timer task priority is set to 5.

## Tasks

The folowing tasks are created in this project:

- **app_main**

  The default task created by FreeRTOS. Here everything starts. It is used to initialize peripherals, cJSON library, and create all other tasks. The *app_main* task creates also synchronization point for the firmware - all the other tasks will be started in the same moment only if all initializations are done. If *app_main* reaches this point it deletes itself.

- **Wifi_Task**

  This task is used to perform any Wifi related operations like:

  - initialize Wifi and NetIF resources
  - start scan for available access points and report the results to UI
  - perform connect and reconnect routine with obtained access point data
  - manage WiFi events and report them to UI

- **SPIFFS_Task**

  This task is used to store any data for future use. It perform read/write operations within internal filesystem partition (SPIFFS) and internal Non-Volatile Storage partition (NVS).

  The SPIFFS partition is used to store Wifi credentials encrypted with AES CBC method. For that, the *SPIFFS_Task* is able to do the following:
  
  - mount a filesystem to a partition within internal memory
  - create, restore, make backup  and check correctness of wifi password files
  - read AES 256-bit key stored in eFuse
  - encrypt/decrypt received password with AES CBC method
  - store encrypted password with all data needed do decrypt (as JSON object)
  - delete the password and all related data if needed

  The NVS partition is used to store OTC config. For that, the *SPIFFS_Task* is able to do the following:

  - create config structure in RAM and then copy stored values from NVS to the config
  - read and set default values from FLASH if needed
  - set new config value to NVS and then update it in RAM structure

  In this version user can change the color theme only, so this is the only one setting stored within NVS. There will be much more stored settings in future.

- **OnlineRequests_Task**

  The task is used to perform any network request of data. It includes:

  - get current time from SNTP server
  - get timezone and current weather based on current IP address (HTTP)
  - get detailed forecast weather for today based on current IP address (HTTP)

  *OnlineRequests_Task* is also able to parse received data (as JSON) and report them to UI and *Clock_Task* if needed

- **Clock_Task**

  The task is used to perform any Clock-related operations like:

  - update time displayed by UI every minute
  - monitor clock synchronization status and report it to UI
  - send synchronization requests

- **UI_Task**

  The task is used to create and manage every element within User Interface. This is the only one task that is allowed to use LVGL library API (except *Display_Task* that is responsible for redrawing the display content). Because of that, the *UI_Task* is able to do the following:

  - read last used theme, initialize all styles within the app in according to the theme
  - initialize all screens and all objects in according to the styles
  - manage UI events and UI objects in runtime
  - restyle all objects when style changes

- **Display_Task**

  The task is used to initialize LCD driver and perform any operation within the LCD. It also initializes the LVGL library, and integrates it with LCD driver and Touchpad driver. When LVGL is ready to use, the *Display_Task* calls only one function that is LVGL handler to perform redraw operation. Because the *UI_Task* simultaneously calls LVGL API, it was necessary to use Mutex protection before every call of any LVGL function. The *LVGL_MutexHandle* is shared between these two tasks to avoid data corruption.

- **TouchPad_Task**

  The task is used to initialize Touchpad driver and configure an interrupt routine if display is touched. When interrupt occurs, the *TouchPad_Task* reads the data from touchpad controller, and store it to the queue. The LVGL library can then read the last stored value.

- **SDCard_Task**

  The task is used to initialize SD Card peripherals and mount file system within the card. When it's done, the task deletes itself. The SD Card is used to store images for weather icons.

## Most important functions

**Clock set/synchronize**

System clock may be in one of 4 states:

  - *clock_not_set*  \
  If the system date is before 2020, it means that clock was not set properly. In this case, on the main screen, the time is represented by "--:--" value, and nothing else is displayed. The *Clock_Task* sends *ONLINEREQ_TIME_UPDATE* request every minute until the date is valid.

  - *clock_not_sync*  \
  If the system date is after 2020, it may be possible that clock was set properly, but synchronization is required. In this case, the *Clock_Task* sends requests to update time from SNTP service, and timezone from HTTP API. Next to it, the clock changes its state to *clock_sync_pending*

  - *clock_sync_pending*  \
  The *Clock_Task* waits for synchronization of time and timezone. If any of them was not completed before waiting time expires, the clock goes back to *clock_not_sync* state. If both of them were completed, that means the clock changes its state to *clock_sync*.

  - *clock_sync*  \
  The *Clock_Task* checks every minute if the time for synchornization has come (synchronization is performed once per hour). If yes, it sends synchroniztion requests, and changes the clock state to *clock_sync_pending*.

To perform any action every minute, the *Clock_Task* calculates time in seconds to next full minute, and sets the timer to notify it exactly when the minute changes to the next.
  
The video below shows the situations: when OTC starts, the clock is not set. After connecting with access point "Test_AP", the clock is set by SNTP service, then finally synchronized with timezone received from HTTP.

[![Video link](https://img.youtube.com/vi/X9yLclQLcq4/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X9yLclQLcq4 "Click to viev")

**Display current/forecast weather**

The current weather data are displayed on the main screen, below current time and date. This area contains numeric values on the right side, like temperature, pressure and humidity, and big icon on the left side that represents current weather in general. Data are obtained from HTTP together with timezone, and are updated once every hour. Location is based on OTC IP - function provided by weatherapi.com API.

To see forecast weather data for today, user should click the weather icon on the main screen. The *UI_Task* receives an event, and sends *ONLINEREQ_DETAILED_UPDATE* request. The request is processed by *OnlineRequests_Task* - it receives JSON from HTTP, parse it, and reports event back to UI. Finally, *UI_Task* sets all values on the weather screen, and swipes it on top. Every time when use clicks the main screen weather icon, new HTTP request is sent, and weather data are updated.

The weather screen contains:
- current location, city and country name are displayed at the top left corner
- weather icon that represents the weather during the day in general. It is located at the top right corner
- average temperature located at the middle of the screen. It is composed of 270deg arc and the number inside it. The color of the arc is changed according to the temperature.
- min/max temperature located at the bottom of arc. It shows minimum and maximum temperature during the day
- four icons located in the bottom half of the screen. They shows the sunrise and sunset time, maximum and average wind speed, total precipitation and percentage chance of rain and snow

The video below shows the situation when user wants to see forecast weather for today.

[![Video link](https://img.youtube.com/vi/BujElTB3X3U/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BujElTB3X3U "Click to viev")

**Search and list for available Wifi networks**

Regardless of wifi connection status, user is able to scan and display available wifi access points. To perform the scan, user should click the wifi button on the main screen. The *UI_Task* receives an event, deletes all elements within the list, then swipes the wifi screen on top, and sends "StartScan" request to the *Wifi_Task*. When scan is done, the *Wifi_Task* sends results back to *UI_Task*. Information provided as results contain:
  - SSID of access point
  - signal strength
  - is AP protected or no

All found AP's are then listed on the wifi screen. The list is located below access point details. The list is scrollable when number of AP's exceeds the maximum number that fits to the screen. When AP name doesn't fit to the screen because it is too long, it will be scrolled horizontally from one side to the other.

The video below shows multiple user request to scan for available wifi network.

[![Video link](https://img.youtube.com/vi/x_LaQOQ0qg0/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x_LaQOQ0qg0 "Click to viev")

**Connect to selected Wifi network**

When one of available AP's has been clicked, the *UI_Task* sends *get_pass_and_connect* request to the *SPIFFS_Task*. The *SPIFFS_Task* checks if a password for selected AP was stored before.

If a password was not stored, the *SPIFFS_Task* sends request back to the *UI_Task* to obtain the password from user. The *UI_Task* creates a popup with keyboard where user can enter the password for selected Wifi network. Entered password is then sent to *Wifi_Task* to perform connection attempt. If the *Wifi_Task* is not able to connect with use provided password, it sends information back to the *UI_Task* that connection has failed. If requested AP was connected, the *Wifi_Task* sends this information to the *UI_Task* together with details of connected AP. In the same time, the *Wifi_Task* checks if user chose to store the password, and sends request to the *SPIFFS_Task* if yes.

If a password was stored, the *SPIFFS_Task* reads and decrypts the password from internal file, then provides it to the *Wifi_Task* to perform connection attempt. Then everything works the same like above.

The *Wifi_Connected* state means in details, that OTC has obtained an IP address from AP's DHCP.

The video below shows connecting to different networks.

[![Video link](https://img.youtube.com/vi/OWhGb_rlnPc/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OWhGb_rlnPc "Click to viev")

**Encrypt/decrypt password**

Encryption and decryption of wifi password uses AES CBC method and *Mbed-TLS* library. The AES 256-bit key is burned out in *EFUSE_BLK_KEY0* with *espefuse.py* tool.

To perform password encryption, the *SPIFFS_Task* generates new JSON object that keeps all the data needed to decryption. Its structure looks like follows:
```
{
  "Example_SSID": {
    "iv": "8Oeh9fMZkP/LpalS",
    "pass": "UnPUFhV9CRKadbCizISmzTAxjVpr0J2IH",
    "pass_len": 18
  }
}
```
- *Example_SSID* - the name of Wifi network, stored as string
- *iv*,  input vector, 16-byte random value that is used to encrypt/decrypt a password, stored as string
- *pass*, encrypted password, stored as string
- *pass_len*, length of decrypted password, stored as integer.

The AES CBC encryption/decryption method can be used only if length of data to be encrypted is a multiplication of number 16. Because of that, if password's length differs from 16/32/48/64, it need to be padded with '0' character to meet the requirements. The *pass_len* value is used to cut off unnecessary characters when password is decrypted.

The *SPIFFS_Task* generates random input vector value, and reads AES key value from eFuse. With all the data needed, it performs encryption, and stores encrypted password together with the rest of values to the JSON created before. At the end, the task writes created JSON to the file with wifi passwords.

To decrypt a password, in general, all the steps are performed in reverse order. At first, the task reads the JSON from file and AES key from eFuse, then uses all values to decrypt the password, and removes useless '0' characters. Ready to use password is then provided to other tasks.

**Get/set NVS config value**

The device stores current configuration in two different memory areas:

- RAM config
- NVS config

RAM config is allocated during the startup, then every single value is copied from NVS storage. If the value was not set in NVS (or NVS cell is corrupted), a default value from flash is loaded. Since it is done, every request of config value is performed withing the RAM config.

To change current value, the NVS config has to ba modified first. The new value is sent to the *SPIFFS_Task*. If the value was changed within NVS storage, it is then updated within the RAM config.

**Theme change**

All graphic components represented on LCD are created with style/theme use. It allows to simplify implementation of change color theme.

Every theme uses 5 colors set:

- background base color, used in most components as a background
- background extra color, used as background for important information
- main base color, the leading color of a theme, used as border color in most components
- main extra color, additional color that fits to the theme, used mostly as fonts color
- contrast color, as it says, looks good as icons color

To change the theme, the *UI_Task* loads those colors from flash (as hex numbers), then converts them to *lv_color_t* structures and stores to the *UI_CurrentTheme* structure. As the last step, the task refreshes all the styles within the aplication.

The video below shows multiple theme change and loading the last used theme from NVS config.

[![Video link](https://img.youtube.com/vi/PGkwEqosur4/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PGkwEqosur4 "Click to viev")

**Connecting status and AP info**

There are two indicators of current Wifi connection status:
- small icon in the top left corner of the Main screen. It indicates only if OTC is connected to any access point (and has obtained IP address)
- network details at the top of Wifi screen.

Information provided by the network details are:
  - SSID (name) of connected Wifi access point
  - RSSI (signal strength, in dBm) of connected AP
  - MAC, IP address and authentication method of connected AP

The RSSI value is shown by a number value that is placed inside an interactive Arc; the color of the Arc is set in according to signal strength (from green at -30dBm to red at -120dBm)

The pictures below shows some examples of different access points:

![OTC High RSSI](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JuraszekL/OTC_Project/master/Resources/OTC_HighRSSI.png) ![OTC Medium RSSI](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JuraszekL/OTC_Project/master/Resources/OTC_MedRSSI.png) ![OTC Low RSSI](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JuraszekL/OTC_Project/master/Resources/OTC_LowRSSI.png)

# List of external tools/resources

Besides the components mentioned above, the OTC project was developed with use:
- [**Gluphr Studio**](https://www.glyphrstudio.com/online/)
- [**Font Editor Online**](https://tophix.com/assets/js/fonteditor/index-en.html)
- [**Freepik**](https://www.freepik.com/)
- [**Converio**](https://convertio.co/)
- [**draw.io**](https://app.diagrams.net/)
- [**nayarsystems/posix_tz_db**](https://github.com/nayarsystems/posix_tz_db/tree/master)
- [**Wifi Icons by Callum Smith**](https://www.vecteezy.com/vector-art/18881979-set-of-erorr-secure-and-no-wifi-signs)
- [**Varino font by Arterfak Project**](https://www.dafont.com/varino.font)
- [**Digital-7 font by Style-7**](https://www.1001fonts.com/digital-7-font.html)
- [**atanisoft/esp_lcd_ili9488**](https://github.com/atanisoft/esp_lcd_ili9488/tree/8ab9308ba07a5783ae8ad271a4a846327a12d7a0)

Commit message:

backlight value can be stored in NVS + default value set to 50%

README.md, after:

# The OTC Project

![OTC_LOGO](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JuraszekL/OTC_Project/master/Resources/OTC_Logo.png)

OTC or just Online Table Clock is, as it says, my concept of table clock that is able to get time/weather related data from the internet.

# Table of content
1. [**In nutshell**](#in-nutshell)
2. [**Motivation**](#motivation)
3. [**Functionality**](#functionality)
4. [**Milestones**](#milestones)
5. [**Detailed description**](#detailed-description)
   * [**Hardware**](#hardware)
   * [**Configuration**](#configuration)
   * [**Tasks**](#tasks)
   * [**Most important functions**](#most-important-functions)

6.[**List of external tools/resources**](#List-of-external-tools/resources) 

# In nutshell

OTC project is based on	[ESP32 Terminal](https://www.elecrow.com/esp-terminal-with-esp32-3-5-inch-parallel-480x320-tft-capacitive-touch-display-rgb-by-chip-ili9488.html) module. The module is equipped with ESP32S3 MCU with 16MB Flash and 8MB RAM memory, 480x320 LCD screen with capacitive touch and USB-C port for serial programming. The firmware has been written in pure C, and is based on [FreeRTOS](https://www.freertos.org/) port for Espressif microcontrolers. The main tools used for this project are:
- [ESP-IDF v5.0.3](https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/tree/release/v5.0)
- [Eclipse IDE, Version: 2022-09](https://www.eclipse.org/downloads/packages/release/2022-09/r) 
- [LVGL v8.3.7](https://github.com/lvgl/lvgl/tree/release/v8.3)
- [SquareLine Studio 1.3.1](https://squareline.io/downloads)

To obtain weather and location data, is uses free [Weather API](https://www.weatherapi.com/), and [cJSON](https://github.com/DaveGamble/cJSON) library to parse the data. Encryption and decryption of stored wifi passwords are done with Espressif's port of [Mbed-TLS](https://github.com/Mbed-TLS/mbedtls) library. 

![OTC Main Screen](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JuraszekL/OTC_Project/master/Resources/OTC_MainScreen.png)

# Motivation

This project is for learning purposes only. Feel free to use it.

# Functionality

Current version - v1.0.0

In this version OTC is able to:
- search for available wifi access points and represent the results on the screen. Each one AP within the list shows SSID name, signal strength and informs that AP is protected or not.
- connect with chosen AP, show details about connected AP
- ask user to enter AP password, save encrypted password, search and decrypt saved password if exists
- delete saved password for chosen AP
- get current time, timezone and basic weather data for current location
- get detailed weather data for current location
- change color theme without reseting the device
- change backlight brightness from UI
- store various settings in Non-Volatile Storage memory and load it during startup

# Milestones

The project is still under development. Next milestones are:
- add buzzer management
- add alarm function
- add RTC and low-power support
- add Li-Ion battery management
- add OTA firmware update
- add statistics screen
- add logfile

# Detailed description

## Hardware

Although The ESP32 Terminal module is ready to use dev board, one modification has to be done. Pin 4 of touch controller (PENI) generates an interrupt when touch is pressed; because of insufficient number of pins, that pin is disconnected with R35 jumper from GPIO0, so GPIO0 is used only to enter BOOT mode with "BOOT" switch. Observations showed that both functions (entering boot mode and recieveing touch interrupts) can be covered by GPIO0 without any unexpected behavior, so R35 has been jointed.

## Configuration

Internal flash memory is configured as Quad-SPI, and works with 80MHz. Internal RAM memory is configured as Octal-SPI and works with 80MHz as well. The .bss and Wifi/LwIP resources can be placed into external RAM. Instruction cache is set to 32kB, data cache to 64kB.
Internal Wifi task is pinned to core 1. The Timer task priority is set to 5.

## Tasks

The folowing tasks are created in this project:

- **app_main**

  The default task created by FreeRTOS. Here everything starts. It is used to initialize peripherals, cJSON library, and create all other tasks. The *app_main* task creates also synchronization point for the firmware - all the other tasks will be started in the same moment only if all initializations are done. If *app_main* reaches this point it deletes itself.

- **Wifi_Task**

  This task is used to perform any Wifi related operations like:

  - initialize Wifi and NetIF resources
  - start scan for available access points and report the results to UI
  - perform connect and reconnect routine with obtained access point data
  - manage WiFi events and report them to UI

- **SPIFFS_Task**

  This task is used to store any data for future use. It perform read/write operations within internal filesystem partition (SPIFFS) and internal Non-Volatile Storage partition (NVS).

  The SPIFFS partition is used to store Wifi credentials encrypted with AES CBC method. For that, the *SPIFFS_Task* is able to do the following:
  
  - mount a filesystem to a partition within internal memory
  - create, restore, make backup  and check correctness of wifi password files
  - read AES 256-bit key stored in eFuse
  - encrypt/decrypt received password with AES CBC method
  - store encrypted password with all data needed do decrypt (as JSON object)
  - delete the password and all related data if needed

  The NVS partition is used to store OTC config. For that, the *SPIFFS_Task* is able to do the following:

  - create config structure in RAM and then copy stored values from NVS to the config
  - read and set default values from FLASH if needed
  - set new config value to NVS and then update it in RAM structure

  In this version user can change the color theme and backlight value only, so just these two keys are stored within NVS. There will be much more stored settings in future.

- **OnlineRequests_Task**

  The task is used to perform any network request of data. It includes:

  - get current time from SNTP server
  - get timezone and current weather based on current IP address (HTTP)
  - get detailed forecast weather for today based on current IP address (HTTP)

  *OnlineRequests_Task* is also able to parse received data (as JSON) and report them to UI and *Clock_Task* if needed

- **Clock_Task**

  The task is used to perform any Clock-related operations like:

  - update time displayed by UI every minute
  - monitor clock synchronization status and report it to UI
  - send synchronization requests

- **UI_Task**

  The task is used to create and manage every element within User Interface. This is the only one task that is allowed to use LVGL library API (except *Display_Task* that is responsible for redrawing the display content). Because of that, the *UI_Task* is able to do the following:

  - read last used theme, initialize all styles within the app in according to the theme
  - initialize all screens and all objects in according to the styles
  - manage UI events and UI objects in runtime
  - restyle all objects when style changes

- **Display_Task**

  The task is used to initialize LCD driver and perform any operation within the LCD. It also initializes the LVGL library, and integrates it with LCD driver and Touchpad driver. When LVGL is ready to use, the *Display_Task* calls only one function that is LVGL handler to perform redraw operation. Because the *UI_Task* simultaneously calls LVGL API, it was necessary to use Mutex protection before every call of any LVGL function. The *LVGL_MutexHandle* is shared between these two tasks to avoid data corruption.

- **TouchPad_Task**

  The task is used to initialize Touchpad driver and configure an interrupt routine if display is touched. When interrupt occurs, the *TouchPad_Task* reads the data from touchpad controller, and store it to the queue. The LVGL library can then read the last stored value.

- **SDCard_Task**

  The task is used to initialize SD Card peripherals and mount file system within the card. When it's done, the task deletes itself. The SD Card is used to store images for weather icons.

## Most important functions

**Clock set/synchronize**

System clock may be in one of 4 states:

  - *clock_not_set*  \
  If the system date is before 2020, it means that clock was not set properly. In this case, on the main screen, the time is represented by "--:--" value, and nothing else is displayed. The *Clock_Task* sends *ONLINEREQ_TIME_UPDATE* request every minute until the date is valid.

  - *clock_not_sync*  \
  If the system date is after 2020, it may be possible that clock was set properly, but synchronization is required. In this case, the *Clock_Task* sends requests to update time from SNTP service, and timezone from HTTP API. Next to it, the clock changes its state to *clock_sync_pending*

  - *clock_sync_pending*  \
  The *Clock_Task* waits for synchronization of time and timezone. If any of them was not completed before waiting time expires, the clock goes back to *clock_not_sync* state. If both of them were completed, that means the clock changes its state to *clock_sync*.

  - *clock_sync*  \
  The *Clock_Task* checks every minute if the time for synchornization has come (synchronization is performed once per hour). If yes, it sends synchroniztion requests, and changes the clock state to *clock_sync_pending*.

To perform any action every minute, the *Clock_Task* calculates time in seconds to next full minute, and sets the timer to notify it exactly when the minute changes to the next.
  
The video below shows the situations: when OTC starts, the clock is not set. After connecting with access point "Test_AP", the clock is set by SNTP service, then finally synchronized with timezone received from HTTP.

[![Video link](https://img.youtube.com/vi/X9yLclQLcq4/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X9yLclQLcq4 "Click to viev")

**Display current/forecast weather**

The current weather data are displayed on the main screen, below current time and date. This area contains numeric values on the right side, like temperature, pressure and humidity, and big icon on the left side that represents current weather in general. Data are obtained from HTTP together with timezone, and are updated once every hour. Location is based on OTC IP - function provided by weatherapi.com API.

To see forecast weather data for today, user should click the weather icon on the main screen. The *UI_Task* receives an event, and sends *ONLINEREQ_DETAILED_UPDATE* request. The request is processed by *OnlineRequests_Task* - it receives JSON from HTTP, parse it, and reports event back to UI. Finally, *UI_Task* sets all values on the weather screen, and swipes it on top. Every time when use clicks the main screen weather icon, new HTTP request is sent, and weather data are updated.

The weather screen contains:
- current location, city and country name are displayed at the top left corner
- weather icon that represents the weather during the day in general. It is located at the top right corner
- average temperature located at the middle of the screen. It is composed of 270deg arc and the number inside it. The color of the arc is changed according to the temperature.
- min/max temperature located at the bottom of arc. It shows minimum and maximum temperature during the day
- four icons located in the bottom half of the screen. They shows the sunrise and sunset time, maximum and average wind speed, total precipitation and percentage chance of rain and snow

The video below shows the situation when user wants to see forecast weather for today.

[![Video link](https://img.youtube.com/vi/BujElTB3X3U/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BujElTB3X3U "Click to viev")

**Search and list for available Wifi networks**

Regardless of wifi connection status, user is able to scan and display available wifi access points. To perform the scan, user should click the wifi button on the main screen. The *UI_Task* receives an event, deletes all elements within the list, then swipes the wifi screen on top, and sends "StartScan" request to the *Wifi_Task*. When scan is done, the *Wifi_Task* sends results back to *UI_Task*. Information provided as results contain:
  - SSID of access point
  - signal strength
  - is AP protected or no

All found AP's are then listed on the wifi screen. The list is located below access point details. The list is scrollable when number of AP's exceeds the maximum number that fits to the screen. When AP name doesn't fit to the screen because it is too long, it will be scrolled horizontally from one side to the other.

The video below shows multiple user request to scan for available wifi network.

[![Video link](https://img.youtube.com/vi/x_LaQOQ0qg0/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x_LaQOQ0qg0 "Click to viev")

**Connect to selected Wifi network**

When one of available AP's has been clicked, the *UI_Task* sends *get_pass_and_connect* request to the *SPIFFS_Task*. The *SPIFFS_Task* checks if a password for selected AP was stored before.

If a password was not stored, the *SPIFFS_Task* sends request back to the *UI_Task* to obtain the password from user. The *UI_Task* creates a popup with keyboard where user can enter the password for selected Wifi network. Entered password is then sent to *Wifi_Task* to perform connection attempt. If the *Wifi_Task* is not able to connect with use provided password, it sends information back to the *UI_Task* that connection has failed. If requested AP was connected, the *Wifi_Task* sends this information to the *UI_Task* together with details of connected AP. In the same time, the *Wifi_Task* checks if user chose to store the password, and sends request to the *SPIFFS_Task* if yes.

If a password was stored, the *SPIFFS_Task* reads and decrypts the password from internal file, then provides it to the *Wifi_Task* to perform connection attempt. Then everything works the same like above.

The *Wifi_Connected* state means in details, that OTC has obtained an IP address from AP's DHCP.

The video below shows connecting to different networks.

[![Video link](https://img.youtube.com/vi/OWhGb_rlnPc/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OWhGb_rlnPc "Click to viev")

**Encrypt/decrypt password**

Encryption and decryption of wifi password uses AES CBC method and *Mbed-TLS* library. The AES 256-bit key is burned out in *EFUSE_BLK_KEY0* with *espefuse.py* tool.

To perform password encryption, the *SPIFFS_Task* generates new JSON object that keeps all the data needed to decryption. Its structure looks like follows:
```
{
  "Example_SSID": {
    "iv": "8Oeh9fMZkP/LpalS",
    "pass": "UnPUFhV9CRKadbCizISmzTAxjVpr0J2IH",
    "pass_len": 18
  }
}
```
- *Example_SSID* - the name of Wifi network, stored as string
- *iv*,  input vector, 16-byte random value that is used to encrypt/decrypt a password, stored as string
- *pass*, encrypted password, stored as string
- *pass_len*, length of decrypted password, stored as integer.

The AES CBC encryption/decryption method can be used only if length of data to be encrypted is a multiplication of number 16. Because of that, if password's length differs from 16/32/48/64, it need to be padded with '0' character to meet the requirements. The *pass_len* value is used to cut off unnecessary characters when password is decrypted.

The *SPIFFS_Task* generates random input vector value, and reads AES key value from eFuse. With all the data needed, it performs encryption, and stores encrypted password together with the rest of values to the JSON created before. At the end, the task writes created JSON to the file with wifi passwords.

To decrypt a password, in general, all the steps are performed in reverse order. At first, the task reads the JSON from file and AES key from eFuse, then uses all values to decrypt the password, and removes useless '0' characters. Ready to use password is then provided to other tasks.

**Get/set NVS config value**

The device stores current configuration in two different memory areas:

- RAM config
- NVS config

RAM config is allocated during the startup, then every single value is copied from NVS storage. If the value was not set in NVS (or NVS cell is corrupted), a default value from flash is loaded. Since it is done, every request of config value is performed withing the RAM config.

To change current value, the NVS config has to ba modified first. The new value is sent to the *SPIFFS_Task*. If the value was changed within NVS storage, it is then updated within the RAM config.

**Theme change**

All graphic components represented on LCD are created with style/theme use. It allows to simplify implementation of change color theme.

Every theme uses 5 colors set:

- background base color, used in most components as a background
- background extra color, used as background for important information
- main base color, the leading color of a theme, used as border color in most components
- main extra color, additional color that fits to the theme, used mostly as fonts color
- contrast color, as it says, looks good as icons color

To change the theme, the *UI_Task* loads those colors from flash (as hex numbers), then converts them to *lv_color_t* structures and stores to the *UI_CurrentTheme* structure. As the last step, the task refreshes all the styles within the aplication.

The video below shows multiple theme change and loading the last used theme from NVS config.

[![Video link](https://img.youtube.com/vi/PGkwEqosur4/0.jpg)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PGkwEqosur4 "Click to viev")

**Connecting status and AP info**

There are two indicators of current Wifi connection status:
- small icon in the top left corner of the Main screen. It indicates only if OTC is connected to any access point (and has obtained IP address)
- network details at the top of Wifi screen.

Information provided by the network details are:
  - SSID (name) of connected Wifi access point
  - RSSI (signal strength, in dBm) of connected AP
  - MAC, IP address and authentication method of connected AP

The RSSI value is shown by a number value that is placed inside an interactive Arc; the color of the Arc is set in according to signal strength (from green at -30dBm to red at -120dBm)

The pictures below shows some examples of different access points:

![OTC High RSSI](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JuraszekL/OTC_Project/master/Resources/OTC_HighRSSI.png) ![OTC Medium RSSI](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JuraszekL/OTC_Project/master/Resources/OTC_MedRSSI.png) ![OTC Low RSSI](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/JuraszekL/OTC_Project/master/Resources/OTC_LowRSSI.png)

# List of external tools/resources

Besides the components mentioned above, the OTC project was developed with use:
- [**Gluphr Studio**](https://www.glyphrstudio.com/online/)
- [**Font Editor Online**](https://tophix.com/assets/js/fonteditor/index-en.html)
- [**Freepik**](https://www.freepik.com/)
- [**Converio**](https://convertio.co/)
- [**draw.io**](https://app.diagrams.net/)
- [**nayarsystems/posix_tz_db**](https://github.com/nayarsystems/posix_tz_db/tree/master)
- [**Wifi Icons by Callum Smith**](https://www.vecteezy.com/vector-art/18881979-set-of-erorr-secure-and-no-wifi-signs)
- [**Varino font by Arterfak Project**](https://www.dafont.com/varino.font)
- [**Digital-7 font by Style-7**](https://www.1001fonts.com/digital-7-font.html)
- [**atanisoft/esp_lcd_ili9488**](https://github.com/atanisoft/esp_lcd_ili9488/tree/8ab9308ba07a5783ae8ad271a4a846327a12d7a0)
